CSCI 2390 2020 Meeting 1: Introduction

CSCI 2390: Privacy-Conscious Computer Systems

What does the course title mean?
  Realistic systems whose design takes user privacy into account.
  "Conscious" because this is about adding privacy-awareness to
  systems that have some other primary purpose.

This is an important area because computers process ever more of our
sensitive personal information, often remotely and away from devices that
we directly control ourselves. This has increased the potential for data
to be leaked, stolen, or misused, either intentionally or unintentionally.
As a result, legislatures are setting new rules, and scrutiny of big web
and IT companies has increased.

What will we do?
  Read, present, and discuss research papers.
  Try our practical systems.
  Complete a research project of your own.

Course structure
  https://cs.brown.edu/courses/csci2390/2020
  today: overview and discussion about privacy
  further meetings will be paper discussions (not lectures)
    either about a research paper, or a piece of software/project
  from meeting 4 onwards, you will present papers
    presentation (~30 min)
      highlight key ideas and lessons
      track down hard details (may want to read further related work)
      raise questions for discussion
      if possible, try out the program or system
      don't worry, I'll help
    each discussion (50 min) has leaders
      sign up via form linked from the schedule page for a paper to lead
      everyone should read and think about every paper
        NOT just turn up and wait for the discussion leads to explain!
        prepare to ask and answer questions!
      critique/support the work
        on a technical level (correctness, methods, performance?)
        on a pragmatic level (deployable, practical, flexile?)
  assignment: paper questions
    set questions about the paper
    space to ask *your* questions
    submit answers by 11pm on the day before class
  two larger assignments
    1. request your personal data from web services and analyze it
    2. a GDPR case study & presentation
    due on Fri Sept 18 and Sept 25
  project
    pick a research idea, inspired by the course or related
    design, build and evaluate solution, check if the idea is good
    proposal (due Oct 2)
    project conferences
    report, final short presentation
    groups of 2-3 students encouraged, but can work on your own too

Paper reading
  research papers dense and can be tough reads
  allow at least 1-2 hours per paper
    you'll get better/quicker at this over time
  technique
    first pass, 5-10 minutes: get general idea
      read title, abstract, intro, perhaps conclusions
    second pass, 1 hour+: understand the details
      what is the problem?
      what is the solution/approach proposed?
      how does it compare with previous work?
      how well does it work?
    now, make a judgement
      do you like the paper?
      do you think its technique works for the application(s) it targets?
      do you think the system/technique is realistic for practical use?
      what issues do you see with the design described?
      what takeaways/ideas are important to remember?
    if you are the presenter/lead for a paper, you will want to answer
    the above questions ("second pass") in your presentation, and ensure
    the judgement questions get discussed
  for more, see for example "How to read a paper" by S. Keshav
    http://blizzard.cs.uwaterloo.ca/keshav/home/Papers/data/07/paper-reading.pdf
  for more on what makes a good paper, see "How (and How Not) to Write a Good
    Systems Paper" by Levin and Redell
    https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi12/guidelines-authors

---

Constitutional podcast episode
  https://www.washingtonpost.com/podcasts/constitutional/episode--privacy/
  what is privacy?
    "right to be left alone"
    protection from state, other individuals, corporations
  notion has evolved over time
    ex: American revolution in part about protection of property
      from search and seizure without warrant
      4th amendment to U.S. constitution explicit about this
      => protection from state
    ex: tabloid press around 1900
      protection of individual from distress due to gossip
      Brandeis tort laws
      recent: Hulk Hogan vs. Gawker media
      => protection from media/other individuals
    ex: Olmstead vs. U.S.
      wiretapping, new technology, how does 4th amendment apply?
      => protection from state abusing new tech
    ex: Carpenter vs. U.S.
      new tech vs. third party doctrine
      giving information to 3rd party => loss of expectation of privacy
      very problematic with today's technology!
      => protection from goverment, but also 3rd parties
  Q: what does privacy mean on the internet today?


Problem setting: a typical web application
  [user browsers, internet, web servers w/ app logic, DB]
  users' data in DB, held on servers not under user control
    social media posts
    pictures
    emails
    e-commerce orders
    telemetry data about how user interacts with web site
    ...
  very successful model!
    always available
    no need to run servers
    no need to back up data
    application can combine multiple users' data
  running servers + DB costs money
    users pay? turns out people like "free" services better
    often: company monetizes user data
  problem: lack of control
    web service sets rules for who may access data
    web service controls how data stored and secured
    web service may snoop, sell information
    web service employees may snoop for personal reasons
    web service may snoop on behalf of the government
  any control over data that exists is through web UI or API defined by company
    can be more restrictive than users desire
      ex: FB privacy settings
    can have bugs that expose private data!
      ex: FB graph search
  reality is even more complex than this picture
    not just DB, but multiple storage systems
    machine learning models trained over data
    logging, backups, A/B testing, internal data analysis

What can we do about this?
  option 1: give up
    accept that we're entering a Faustian bargain for free services
    could have drastic consequences in the future
      makes us vulnerable to identity theft, embarrassment, repression
      gives companies enormous, unprecedented power
  option 2: stop using web services
    unlikely to be realistic
    use often externally mandated (ex: by employer, university, etc.)
  option 3: go rogue, organize the grassroots
    replace all services with decentralized alternatives
      cryptocurrencies, blockchains, P2P
    idea: trust no one, all data resides on users' devices
    practicality unclear, but we'll look at this
  option 4: lobby for change and invent it
    companies want to avoid embarassing scandals
      but little incentive to change their business model
    legislators increasingly realize there's a problem
      but laws are slow to change, and intentionally vague
      technology moves much more rapidly
    our role as engineers and researchers: provide solutions that can help
      privacy not a chief concern in system design today
      traditionally we didn't care about how systems we built are used
        ex: general purpose relational database

What are our goals?
  improve user privacy
    vague, and can mean many things
  candidate 1: make users anonymous, strong protections, tinfoil hats
    certainly reasonable in some settings, ex: dissidents communicating
  candidate 2: increase control over what companies do with our data
    less ambitious, but more compatible with current user experience
    aim to avoid preventable data exposure and unwanted data use
  concerns
    maintain current successful web site architecture?
      easy to program for developers
      good performance, reliability
      users generally happy
      can provide useful services by combining users' data
        ex: crowdsourced recommendations
      successful revenue model exists (advertising)
    overheads imposed on web site operators
      extra development cost
      extra hosting cost (backend performance, space)
      extra complexity
      restrictions in what backend can do
      costs of monitoring compliance
    overheads imposed on users
      need to understand implications of privacy choices
      already unwilling to read privacy policies...
      for some solutions, need to be much more active participants in service
  make technology recommendations
    industry and government need them
    but need to be realistic about chances of adoption
  invent new technology
    may come in the form of different system designs
    may apply existing research ideas in new ways
    may help better inform users about choices and their implications

Some questions we'll look at:

* Where should a user's data be stored? On the user's own computer? In a
  datacenter run by a company like Google, Amazon, Facebook, or Microsoft? In
  commercial cloud storage services such as Amazon S3? In cooperative,
  decentralized peer-to-peer storage?

* What does current legislation require from the software systems that store
  and process our data? Are the current systems adequate?

* How do we translate abstract legislative requirements (e.g., the rights
  granted to users by the EU's GDPR) into technological solutions?

* What is the role of encrypted storage and data transmission? Can it help us
  preserve our privacy, given that many services we use need to process our data
  in various ways? Who should hold the keys?

* What are the options for access control? Centralized ACLs, cryptography, or
  other techniques? How can we maintain ACLs with confidence that backend
  processing actually respects them?

* Can we define ACLs attached to the notion of a "purpose" of data processing?
  How do users consent to one use of their data, but object to another?

* Can we expect decentralized applications, such as those proposed in the
  context of smart contracts and blockchains, to be better than current web
  application stack from a privacy perspective?

* What are the right trust models for services that hold and process user data?
  How paranoid should we be?

* To what extent are the business models (e.g., targeted advertising) of current
  "free" web services incompatible with the desire for data privacy, and are the
  technologies that preserve both privacy and profitability?

* What performance overheads are acceptable for better privacy protection?

* Can we deeply embed user data privacy as a design concern in the computer
  systems we build? How disruptive would such a change be?

For next Tuesday:
  read paper on targeted advertising on Twitter
  submit & answer questions online
